Hey, Seth. Welcome back to Talk Python To Me.
Hey, Michael.
Awesome to have you here. I'm really excited to get a look into the zeitgeist of the core devs
and the people building Python for us through the Python Language Summit.
Yeah. Let's do it.
Let's do it. So we're going to talk about the 2024 Language Summit that happened
in Pittsburgh. It's like an embedded mini conference inside of PyCon, which is smart
rather than trying to travel all over. But before we get into that and all those things, I know you've
been on the show not too long ago, but for those who may have missed your introductions, who are
you? What do you do for Python these days? Yeah, I'm Seth Larson, and I've been working at the
Python Software Foundation for a little over a year now as the security developer in residence.
And so that means that I do a lot of stuff related to security just for the entire Python
ecosystem. That's CPython, pip, the packaging ecosystem, like outwardly facing things for PyPI,
maybe not as much the internals. I leave that for Mike Fiedler, the PyPI safety and security
engineer. And I maintain a lot of open source projects specifically in like the HTTP and
internet space. So like requests, your lib3, trust store, things like that.
Oh, awesome. Yeah. Thanks for everything you're doing there. And how's the role working out? I
know this is one of, you were the first person in this role, like officially, right? Is that true?
That is true. Yeah. I was the first security oriented hire at the PSF. It's been going really
I mean, I feel like we've made a lot of improvements and there's a lot of exciting stuff that I'm working on today.
And I don't know.
I think one of the things that also got highlighted because this role exists, it just means that more people at the PSF and in CPython core team and just in the Python ecosystem in general are talking more about security.
And like, that's just as important as the stuff that I'm doing day to day is that it's just, there's just more awareness of what's happening in security.
Yeah.
So I have two polar opposite thoughts here.
One is I'm really surprised how few significant issues there are in Python, CPython.
You know, the interpreter, the runtime, the standard library, all that.
It's really rare that you get a, you know, red light splashing.
Oh my gosh, go patch your systems now.
Right.
There's sometimes really minor things like this audit trail is not completely followed
under this condition, but that's not a, the pager goes off and, you know, cause you got,
it's now a race.
that's one thing.
So that's awesome.
Right.
That the other is high PI typo squatting, all the, all the stuff that makes Python extra
good, the half million packages and other shady things people do.
And we're going to talk about this in the broader sense, not pipe AI, but you know,
in the open source space of like, well, what if, what if somebody took over a GitHub account
for a little while or, or something?
Yeah. So, and that's not on fire, but that's, there are battles being waged actively there, I would say, right?
Yes, 100%.
It's a contrast, right?
I can speak with confidence that there is malware on PyPI right now as we speak.
But like, yeah, so that's the case, right?
I think it really has to do with CPython is an incredibly mature project in like every sense of the word,
like governance, security, design, all of these things, right?
And like, there's just a huge amount of people and resources being,
being like working on CPython at any one moment.
And like contrast that to the, you said half a million, you know,
I tend to focus on the like 95% of downloads by totality, right?
Because there's a lot of projects on PyPI that maybe don't have the supply
chain criticality of others, right?
Yeah, absolutely. 100%.
And I think when you hone in on that smaller window of projects,
it ends up being a much better picture than...
I think it's 100% good picture, honestly.
There are legitimate bugs that people have to deal with.
Like, you know, maybe there's a Django release that says,
we didn't validate the CRF token in this particular form,
so you should update your Django, right?
And that's just a legit bug.
That's not people attempting to do bad things.
I mean, I can't even take really any credit
for how secure and mature CPython is.
I'm such a late addition in the life of CPython
and like PyPI projects.
And so it really is the community.
I think it is just, there's so much investment
and so much love and care happening
in all these projects that it does speak volumes.
But that, I mean, that doesn't mean
that we need to think that things need to be perfect
or that it's necessarily a bad thing to have a vulnerability in a project
because there's projects that are even more mature than CPython
that have vulnerabilities all the time.
It's totally normal.
I think the important thing is just like knowing what to do when that happens.
And that's where I come in.
Yeah.
I don't want to belabor this because, you know, the security angle,
while interesting to me and central to what you're up to, is not the topic.
but I do think it's interesting that the White House recently came out.
I think it was the White House.
It said, we recommend Python and a couple other languages.
We basically, we recommend memory safe languages, which, did you see that post?
You must have, right?
I certainly did.
And I actually had a big part of recommending that to the White House.
So when the...
No kidding.
I had no idea.
Yeah.
So the PSF, we responded to the request for information that CISA put out or the office
of the cyber director put out, I think a year and change ago.
And in that post, we recommended CPython and Python in general as a memory safe language
and went into all the details about like, yes, it's written in C, but like the language
itself, what people will actually be programming in is Python.
And we also emphasized how Python is a bridge into memory unsafe languages.
And because of all the focus on performance lately, it's actually like sometimes in some
cases more performant to keep the code written in Python as opposed to writing it in C.
And so we emphasize a whole bunch of stuff.
And so I think that that had a small percentage of the reason why that was recommended.
Put it on the radar and positioned it correctly, maybe.
Exactly.
Awesome.
Well, congratulations.
I was just going to say that's kind of interesting,
but there's way more to it than that.
There's a lot happening behind the scenes.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, there is.
All right, shall we talk about this Language Summit thing?
Let's do it.
So let's just, I mean, I gave it sort of a vague intro.
You wrote a nice blog post about it here on the Python blog,
but just give us a sense of what the language summit,
what is it for?
Is this something,
is like an open space I can go to or not?
No, so it is a specific space
for Python core developers to use.
And so I think the whole goal of this
is to get a bunch of core developers
in a room together to discuss things
and to kind of get some recommendations,
some ideas flowing,
maybe without necessarily having the full formed thought.
Because putting something out there,
completely radically changing the direction of Python,
that's a lot to put that out just publicly or whatever.
And so this is a place to collaborate for core developers
and some special guests
because not everyone that's there is a core developer,
but it is invite.
So you have to apply to go and say why you want to go.
And then, yeah.
- I think some folks who were,
can't remember if it was Sebastian Ramirez
or Samuel Colvin or something around the typing thing.
I remember some of those folks might've been at one of them
'cause they're like, wait, we can't change typing
to be more performant,
but where it completely ignores the runtime stuff
'cause we have all these frameworks.
- Right, right, right.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, but the language summit,
it's a whole bunch of different like submitted topics.
People will talk and then there's discussion.
and some outcome.
Maybe there's no outcome.
Maybe there's like next steps.
Maybe we solve some problems within the time of the meeting.
And yeah, my job there was to actually like take down
all the notes and write about it
and like publish these blog posts.
'Cause one of the reasons why this is allowed
to be like an invite only meeting
is that there is someone who is basically taking notes
and blogging about everything that gets discussed
and like what happened during the discussion
so that then the community can learn about
what actually happened without necessarily,
you know, getting the rawness of it, I guess.
- Yeah, there's a real careful balance
you gotta strike between allowing the freedom to say
whatever without public scrutiny,
but at the same time you don't want it to be like,
well, the Python cabal met, they've decided.
- They don't like your idea or whatever.
- Exactly.
- Yeah, it's cool.
So I'll point people, obviously it's gonna be in the show notes,
point people at your write up.
It's like a meta post, I guess, would you say that?
It talks about sort of-
- Landing page.
- Landing page, exactly.
Four, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine.
And then nine topics and presentations that were covered.
And then the lightning talks,
which is also almost like another sub meta section.
So there's a lot to explore here
and there's nice write-ups on each of these.
So where should we start?
And we wanna kinda wrap up the conversation
we were just having,
'cause that was actually a little bit of a topic
at the language summit, right?
- Yeah, security was definitely a topic
at the language summit.
This was somewhat in the recent light,
the light of xz when xz had happened uh pablo uh one of the release managers for c python 310 and
311 i believe brought this topic and it was basically discussing python's like contribution
and release and all of that model in the light of xz so like xz and i'll just go over really quickly
yeah yeah i'm sure people about xc yeah i'm sure a lot of people have like heard of it at this point
but it was such a long game.
Yeah.
It was crazy.
So yeah, what is the scary part?
What is XD utils?
And then what is the XC util security issue?
Yeah.
So XC utils is a library written in C for basically processing
archives of the XZ format, which is just a compression format like GZIP,
like, you know, any other compression format.
ZotFlee, Bratly, all of those. And so this library was maintained by a single person,
big surprise, and what is relatively little known right before all of this happened, I would say,
it was probably just adding features, fixing bugs every once in a while, make a release,
and all of that. And what ended up happening is this project was identified as a project that had
very few maintainers and also through a series of reasons had a linkage to SSH.
And so what ended up happening. Yep. And so SSH, you can get into SSH and SSHD, then
bad things are going to happen yeah so the whole end goal of this entire operation was to
get access to open ssh uh through like linking basically and so what ended up happening is
a bunch of fake sock puppet accounts showed up after the this loan maintainer indicated that
they were having a little bit of trouble maintaining the project and like meeting user
demands. Like these sock puppet accounts show up like days before they were actually used.
And all kind of in similar fashion, right? And basically are pressuring this maintainer to
either make them feel like they're not doing a good job or to try to add a new maintainer.
In this case, Giatan is the pseudonym that this account used. And what ended up happening is over
a year of
legitimate
positive contribution from this account.
This account
was added as
equivalent to a release manager.
Someone who is approving
PRs and merging things and is
capable of accessing the
actual archives when releases happen.
And then
a good chunk of time
passes after that, and
there's a couple of little
changes added that on their own are not an attack, but it was preparing for an attack where
essentially a small change was added into the release archives that was not a part of the
source tree that activated the entire attack chain. And then when this started to be pulled in
downstream into things like, you know, Fedora, early versions of Red Hat.
This never went into any stable builds, but it was all the pre-releases.
This ended up getting onto people's machines and then was eventually discovered because
of a very small performance difference when logging into SSH.
Yeah.
And that was somebody who wasn't even looking.
I forgot the person's name, but they worked at Microsoft and they were just on the Azure
team or something.
and they they just were like why did this slow down a little bit that's weird and they're like
wait a minute what is this doing in here yeah it was on the verge and you know what a long game one
person one account came along and was just you know i'm gonna hear to help you i'm just gonna make
i'm gonna try to just become your best friend contributor and then another one is just abusing
like mentally abusing the people like why don't you just quit why don't you get some more support
who well let me reach out to some people who are helping me out recently and it turns out these are
like two sides of the same coin yep exactly yeah shady okay luckily that got caught because
you know there's a lot of servers in the world that can be sshed into and like well
we got you know public private key encryption you can't break through that stuff as long as
you don't use passwords like you're gonna be fine unless you're not so i i received
a lovely email on the day that this
happened. Report
to the security response team for Python
because we, of course, use the
XZutils libraries
because Python supports XZ format
as well.
And there was a lovely few
seconds where I'm like, oh, this is either going to be
a fine day for me or a really bad day.
And it ended up being
a fine day.
Are we going to be
canceling all our plans for the next few weeks?
Yeah. Yep. Am I going to have lots of questions to answer from like a concerned customers,
users, but no, it was fine. Yeah. Yeah. I find this kind of stuff is a lot like
everything's fine. You relax, just work's going good. Life's going good. And then,
you know, something's on fire just out of the blue and you have this, you know,
it takes your breath away moment. Like, oh, does that apply to us as well? Because if it does,
everything just changed.
Fun times.
Yeah, really glad I did.
So one of the talks was Python security model
after this issue, the XC utils backdoor.
Tell us about that.
Yeah, so this entire talk was essentially
just overviewing like, hey, is this possible?
Is this possible for CPython to be impacted by such an attack?
And I mean, the answer is yes, it really is.
Because if you have accounts that are willing to put years of effort into contributing good code to CPython, right?
Like that, that is enough to become a core developer likely.
And if you're a core developer, it means you can merge PRs.
It means if you, I mean, if you get two core developer accounts promoted to this level of authorization, you can merge your own PRs with review, right?
Like, we're the big focus on this talk was like, okay, how, how can we prevent this?
And if we, in, in the ways that we can't prevent it, how can we be ready?
And kind of like a discussing whether or not we're ready at this point.
And I think the big consensus was that if we were to discover something like this,
it had already been merged into Python or had been released in Python, that we would be okay
to be able to get it to like get the word out.
Like that sort of infrastructure already exists
and we're not too worried about that.
Like we're CNA.
We can create a CD really quickly.
We can get like the announcements out really quickly.
We can get releases out really quickly.
So like in that way, the reactive sense, we're okay.
In the proactive sense,
which is the more important one,
but it's also the harder one.
Yeah, because when nation states hire people to say the next three years of your job, it's almost like a team of people for multiple years.
It's like the CIA or MI6 or something.
On the code side.
To be honest with you, it doesn't even need to necessarily be nation state level stuff for this to happen.
because vulnerabilities in popular pieces of software
are very lucrative.
You can sell them.
And people make a lot of money
on selling vulnerabilities to projects.
So why not grow your own, right?
Yeah.
Go ahead.
One of the things I think is great
is there's a really long release cycle.
Yeah.
Right?
And like a staged rollout.
So I don't know how many people jump in and install alpha one of some Python, but it's, it's pretty limited and it's not going to make it.
No, no, of course I know.
I see you raising in.
However, I don't see that shipping on, you know, Ubuntu's update channel or, or doc, docker's a whole different deal.
Like let's not even go there, but on the main docker images, you know?
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean, the slow rollout is definitely a big part of it, right?
Like a lot of people get their Python not direct from the source.
They get it from a distribution or they get it from Amazon Linux with Python or whatever, right?
Like it's a distribution of Python.
Or brew install.
Brew install Python, yeah.
So a lot of people are not living on the edge.
And I think that that helps in a way.
obviously people that are living on the edge maybe they're the more valuable targets but
I mean I'm not going to be the one to to encourage that um yeah I I don't think that
I think the biggest defenses against this and this was what was discussed there was
trying to push things to be in the open and actually in a way open source is uniquely
able to respond. Right, right, right, right. Defended against for these sorts of attacks.
Because if this were to happen in Windows, for example, like, would we have had the almost
immediate, like, being able to debug what the actual attack was, how long this had been going on,
what patches were bad, right? Like that, that sort of visibility into the source code is
something that was really important in being able to actually track this thing down.
and so like having test files and binary files not checked into source code and instead generated
so one of the parts of this attack that allowed it to go hidden for so long and be checked into
source code was that all almost all of the attack code was hidden extremely well in a binary file
which made it so that code reviewers some of the test binary uh elements because if you got a
compression file utility, you got to have compressed files for your unit test, right?
Exactly. So it was basically these files were checked in. And there's the just huge binary
blobs that you can't actually get your eyeballs on to review. We talk about like lots of eyeballs
make for shallow bugs. Well, if the eyeballs can't see the bugs, then you're not going to find them.
And so we talked about like, removing binary files from the source code or making sure that
all the binary files that are generated have like a script that allows them to
be generated at any time and things like that.
So is it one of the changes recently?
I can't remember if this was on PI PI or if this is a GitHub thing,
but allowing GitHub to be the thing that publishes directly,
builds the wheels and uploads them to PI PI rather than somebody downloading
the code, building them and uploading it,
which obviously that's a opaque step there.
Yeah. So other, like other things that tie more strongly, these, whatever release artifacts are
actually ending up on people's machines to the source code. So that's, I mean, I would call that
build provenance. There's a whole bunch of different frameworks that that works under,
but yeah, build provenance, being able to tie in an artifact that's installed in your system back to
the actual source code so that when you are evaluating that, that artifact on whether you
you want to install that on your system or deciding whether to upgrade or whatever, you
can look at the source code instead of looking at this compiled binary.
That's something that I really want to focus on for PyPI in the future, but yeah, we're
not there yet.
Awesome.
Yeah.
Because when you look at a project, you say, well, let me see what the release is on GitHub.
If you know that literally that was the thing that compiled or got built and then that's
what's on PyPI, that's a different...
forensic analysis than
somebody's machine.
What it ends up being nice is that
it, and this is the tough part,
is that I feel like a lot of people's behavior, which is to go
on GitHub and look at the diff between tags,
that's what a lot of people do, but that's not actually what you
should do. You should be looking at the diff between the artifacts.
That's the thing that's actually installed on your machine, but that's way
harder to do than looking at the diff tags.
Exactly. We just crowdsource it. We're all crowdsourcing it. Wait for somebody to scream.
I know.
All right. Just related to this, while we're still on this topic, you talked about the...
Somewhere. There we go. There's also big news around CVEs, which are official vulnerability
numbering. So they're referenced through all those cybersecurity talk and stuff, right?
You can describe it better. So big news is that the PSF now, and you alluded to this,
is now an official numbering authority. So rather than saying there's a problem with Python,
who is going to sort of officially call this out and write it up and so on,
Like you guys can do that directly now, right?
Yeah.
So like CVEs are basically,
it's a set of identifiers and records that show,
it's like a bunch of metadata about vulnerabilities in software is what it is.
And it's only one system.
There are a bunch of other like vulnerability databases,
but CVE seems to be the one that everyone uses or references.
And so what being a CVE numbering authority gives us is it makes it so that
someone at the PSF can like operate the CVE UI and, and workflow and all of that to say like,
oh, we want to create a new CVE ID on behalf of the Python team or on behalf of the pip team.
And what that ends up meaning is that because we are part of the process, instead of having to go
to some other entity, so like MITRE or Red Hat or, you know, Microsoft, there's a whole bunch of
CNAs. There's a bunch, there's over a hundred now, I think, instead of going to someone else that,
you know, isn't as well versed in Python or, you know, our release schedule or any of those things,
right. We get to inject the knowledge that we have about Python into all of these records,
into all these advisories. And it makes it so that we don't actually have to talk to someone else to
be able to handle a vulnerability end to end. Right. So like before you would potentially have
a reporter going to talk to someone else and getting a CVE ID, and then they would come talk
to us. And by that point, like it was, it's hard to like make a determination and there's a whole
bunch of things have already happened. And maybe there's messes that need to get cleaned up to
make sure that it's not confusing. So by owning the entire process, we're able to make sure that
things are as little confusing as possible. Like what actually needs to be done for users.
when we publish these things.
Yeah, that's great.
I want to move off the security angle here
because I know there's so much more to talk about.
However, I can't help it.
Do you guys do it?
Have you considered or ever run any sort of bug bounty program?
We don't have a bug bounty program right now.
I mean, the hard part with the bug bounty program
is it takes money.
So if you would like to see a bug bounty program
happening at the PSF.
Get in touch with the PSF.
Send an email.
Yeah, I think incentives are really aligned there.
There's a lot of companies that have this tooling
at the center of their data center.
So maybe.
Yeah, maybe.
Maybe.
Maybe we can make it happen.
All right.
Next up, the REPL or the PyREPL for the Python PyREPL.
What's the deal with this?
Yeah, so this was a talk that was given by a couple of different core devs.
I think this included a bunch of people.
Pablo, Lukash, and Lissandros all gave this talk.
And it was about, hey, this new REPL that's coming in Python 3.13.
Here's all the cool stuff that it can do and how it makes the usability so much better for people.
And they demoed a whole bunch of the new features, which was really exciting.
There was lots of applause showing off a few of these little features.
And I think that the other side of it is because this new REPL is written in Python and not written in C, it lowers the barrier for contributions and maintenance drastically.
Before the REPL was super entwined with the parser and all of these other really low-level details of Python that a lot of people probably didn't want to get involved with if they didn't have to.
Versus this, where it's this completely separate and much more easy to contribute to piece of software.
Yeah.
And did this come from the PyPy project?
Yes, this was PYPy.
And I think that there's been some back and forth,
contributing back, contributing forward, all of that,
which is also really great, right?
Having one REPL shared between two different implementations.
Yeah, that's great.
Just working better together, more people working on it.
I always call PYPY because some people call Python packaging index PyPy.
That's also this other thing.
So anyway.
It's a non-zero part of every one of my days, right?
I'm sure that is.
Because a lot of the times, a significant percentage of my work as a security person is being in working groups that are not Python related at all.
And there's a lot of PyPys flying around.
Yeah, you talk about NumP being on PyPy and you're like, okay, hold on.
Hold on.
Could be two different things.
There's a lot going on here.
Yeah, so this is really interesting.
I haven't really played with it much.
I honestly don't spend a ton of time in the bare Python REPL.
Like if I'm REPL-ing, a lot of times I'm in the JetBrains sort of enhanced REPL that's inside PyCharm, something like that.
And I think partly because there was a lot of challenges with the bare Python REPL, right?
There's no autocomplete.
But worse than that was if you've got a five line function and you want to edit it,
you've kind of got to go up to the top heart hitter.
It really was hard to work with blocks of code.
There's no color, things like that.
Yeah, color is the standard for, if you don't have color in your terminal at this point,
like even 20 years.
Basically, you've given up at that point.
If you don't have an emoji and you don't have color, I mean, come on.
You've got to have the rainbow prompt, maybe the ASCII logo of the thing when it starts up.
A starship?
Oh, yeah.
I didn't even consider the ASCII art, and possibly the ASCII art in color.
No, seriously, though, I do think it sounds like a minor deal, but just the readability
of having highlighting and stuff is real.
Syntax highlighting is huge.
Syntax highlighting is really huge.
That's not a part of the current ripple, I don't think, but it becomes much more possible
because this PyRipple exists.
Yeah.
Yeah, exactly.
Very cool.
I think that like the biggest thing,
yeah, like the whole blocks of code,
I just remember the demo of them showing like,
oh, you have like five lines,
you have to hit up, up, up,
like four times hit enter.
It's just like-
Oh, and if you mess it up,
you got to start over.
You got to start over.
You're just sad.
You just contemplate putting it in a file
instead of doing this in the REPL.
Exactly.
That's why I'm not in there.
I avoid being in there because it's hard.
It's hard to get that right.
This will be really, really great
for people that are just starting Python Journey
because I think that a lot of people
learning and starting off will use the REPL straight up instead of an IDE.
And so like having this,
there was a big focus on like teachability and documenting it and making it
work the same.
Like if you actually like read the post,
like what the discussions were about for like everyone is basically totally in
favor. They loved it,
but they wanted to make sure that this was going to be like a consistent
experience,
specifically like Carol willing had this big point about like having a
consistent experience being really important for teaching.
Python across different operating systems.
Yeah, and something a little bit better than up, up, up five times and don't get it out of order.
Exactly.
Yeah, that's cool.
Though, I guess one of the, I don't know if this was discussed, but one of the challenges
of this, I think, is it requires, and it's not necessarily bad, but just a challenge,
is I think it requires the new Windows terminal rather than, say, cmd.exe, the older style
So it just works out of the box on macOS and on Linux.
But on Windows, you got to be a little careful about how you run it.
Is that right?
So I actually don't know what the current status of all of this is
because time has marched on since these blog posts have happened.
And there has been a lot of work done on the Windows side.
The current team, like the team that presented this,
didn't have any Windows experience.
And so they didn't know really how hard it was going to be.
I think that there's been a lot of strides in the Windows side of things.
So I think the situation's better.
I don't know offhand if cmd.exe is supported
or if it's just the new Windows terminal, but I...
I think it's fine if it's the new Windows terminal.
People need to be using that thing anyway.
It's true.
It's like opening up on your Mac and just having the bare white bash.
I guess it's Z shell these days,
but just the completely non-fixed font.
what is this thing that you are running?
I feel like the terminal is horrible.
Well, that thing is, but you could make it a lot nicer, by the way.
And it's a similar trade-off there in the Windows world.
So, okay.
Interesting.
Next one is, should we adopt calendar versioning?
We're beyond zero-verse, so that's really good.
there's been a reluctance to have python 4 but we've got 3 12 3 13 are we just going to have
3.128 or should we come up with something else right what is calendar versioning and should we
adopt it and how many digits should it have yeah so this was uh presented on by hugo who is the new
release manager for Python 3, 14, and 15,
which maybe that's a little presumptive,
saying those numbers.
Because if this goes through,
that would not be the case anymore.
He's going to work himself straight out of a job here.
What's going on?
Yeah.
This was, there were definitely jokes about,
like, this is just your attempt to get out
of being the release manager for these releases.
But yeah, so Hugo proposed this.
This is kind of like a pre-PEP feeling
out of how this situation should be.
And trying to pare down the options, I think,
was Hugo's biggest question.
What should we do it, and should we pare down the options?
Because there's a million different ways
we can do calendar versioning.
And yeah, I think if you scroll down,
there was a slide that had just every single possible
calendar versioning possibility for Python
and all the different languages.
But yeah, calendar versioning is really common
for programming languages and other things that are similar to Python.
And so this was basically like, hey, we have this yearly release cycle
that has been working for a while, and we're probably going to keep doing it.
It's worth pointing out for people who don't know that it used to be 18 months.
And so the calendar version would get a little out of phase or something there.
But now that it's yearly in the fall, it really lines up perfectly.
Yeah. And so this kind of assumes that we're going to keep doing the yearly thing, which I'm fine with the yearly thing.
But yeah, as long as we kept the yearly schedule, it would line like the release year would line up with whatever the so it'd be like the ended.
The one that was like most agreed upon was like three dot and then a two digit year or what would end up becoming a three digit year when we roll over to 100, assuming that Python still used in 100 years.
But yeah, so like that was kind of like the one that was most palatable to core devs or people were most excited about.
And I think the big reason why switching to like a Calver year was interesting is that we have this thing called like support lifetime.
So like how long is CPython supported?
How long do you get security fixes?
How long do you get bug fixes?
Right.
Yeah, exactly.
Like, let me put this out to the audience.
Is Python 3.8 supported or is it not supported?
I don't know.
You got to do math.
You got to think about it.
Yeah, so 3.7 just recently dropped support, right?
Which is crazy because that seems like a pretty new version of my mind.
But it totally makes sense.
But if you just knew it's supported for how many years?
Six years?
Five years?
It's five years for security releases, I believe.
Yeah.
So then you're like, it's 2025.
So, you know, 2020 is out.
The math becomes a lot easier.
And you also say, like, do I have the current one, right?
If you're not tracking it super carefully, like 3.11, is that the latest?
Like, I don't know.
I only use Python every, like, once a month.
But was it 2023?
Oh, I see.
Well, maybe that's not the latest one.
Okay.
Yeah.
Yeah, so it was just an interesting conversation about figuring out what the best potential option was.
And then Hugo ended up creating a pep.
And I think that's being discussed right now.
So cool.
Why not 2024?
Why 24?
Because that feels, I don't know, it just feels like you've just point shifted what you're doing now.
Rather than really clearly.
Because, you know, as a new person coming in, you don't see that go, it's 24.
So it must be 2024.
Unless you really like put together the calendar.
But if it said.2024, you're like, I bet that's the year, you know?
Right.
Yeah.
I mean, because eventually in the not too distant future, there will be a Python 3.24.
Exactly.
Yeah, we'll see.
So there's going to be a PEP around this, you say.
In fact, it says right here, PEP 604, right?
I think it's PEP.
What is it like?
Well, you know, that's just the yearly announcement.
That's the yearly cycle.
If you scroll down all the way to the bottom, it'll...
We'll find some PEPs.
Yeah.
It just says drafting a pep.
Give that a click. I'm pretty sure there's a number.
2026. There we go.
Okay. Yeah.
So that's going to be a while until they release this pep.
I'm just kidding.
The most important
part of this discussion was
that the Python
version 3.14 be
preserved.
Python.
Yeah. Cool.
It wasn't allowed for 3.14
to change it.
Yeah, the only thing that I can think of that you would have the two digits is that
there's a lot of code and regular expressions and junk out there that checks for that.
But, you know, if we talk about some of the other stuff out there, like that's a pretty
minor change.
It's true.
Like, for example, pre-threaded Python.
Yes, pre-threaded Python.
It's here.
It is here.
Yeah.
Sort of.
actually really surprised me is when I saw this PEP come through, was it 702 or something like that?
It said, we're going to allow free threaded Python, which I'm going to have you explain for folks in
a moment, but you're going to have to have a special build of it. And I thought, oh, well,
that means if you want to play with it, you're going to have to build your own. But I noticed
that the installers now give you an option for it. Yeah, they do. Yeah. Side by side install.
Right. Yeah. The, what is it?
I think there's like a T that gets put onto your actual, like, yes.
Python T is what you type instead of Python.
Yeah. If you want the free threaded one. Yeah. It, I mean,
free threading is here. I mean, there's options.
If you're compiling it yourself, you just enable some options.
And I think I go over that in the actual blog post to the options that you
actually use to try it out. And yeah,
Free threading essentially is a way to remove the GIL and move to a different reference counting model, object counting model.
Which is quite exciting for a lot of people.
But what it will end up meaning is that a lot of the packages that are written in C or that are relying on CPython APIs will have to get either tweaked a little bit to use these slightly different C APIs
to make it so that they play nicely
with having no GIL enabled
and with the new memory management.
Yeah.
It's super exciting.
It's a variety of changes in the ecosystem, basically.
Yeah, just because you have threads
doesn't mean you get perfect scalability across the cores.
I can't remember who wrote this article.
Was it Simon Willison, maybe?
Who did some...
Yeah, I'm pretty sure it was Simon Willison
who wrote one that said,
we're going to take an algorithm that can is kind of embarrassingly parallel and parallelize it.
And it turned out to be something like 50% gain per core. So it was like he had eight cores,
and it was four times faster with free threaded Python than without, which is still if you can get
your code to run four times faster. That's still really good, right? Yeah. But it's going to have,
like you said i think it's going to have an interesting
requirement put on all the people building packages right yeah and i know when i hear people say
i think maybe you just said like oh it's going to be the c extension packages that are really
gonna have to deal with it because they they'll have to do locks in their thing i think even in
the Python code. There's certainly algorithms that have multiple steps that they'll get some data
here. They'll work with the data. They'll make some changes. Then they'll put the data back in
the same place. And even that would be subject to a race condition. Right. And I think we're,
you know, I've in long in the past did a lot of C++. I did a lot of C#.
And in communities like that, people are always focused.
They're like, always kind of crazy about two things, memory and threading.
And we just don't do that in Python.
I think we have just leveraged the fact that the gil gives us kind of enough coarse-grained granularity, the execution of our code, that it's just not something we hit a lot.
And we don't try to do a ton of threading because it doesn't work all that well.
However, this could expose lots of stuff.
This could put a new focus on that.
Yeah, definitely.
Yeah.
Just having more people using threading with Python,
that's going to be huge for finding thread safety issues.
Yeah, it's just really exciting.
I think that, and there's another blog post,
a completely separate one that talks about the C API.
And there was some mention about free threading
and evolving the API so that it's a lot easier to use from a three, a free threading perspective.
so like there's a ton of work happening in here to make this as easy, hopefully
brief kind of split in the ecosystem and then have it converge together.
I think that's like the overall plan is like, okay, we gotta, we gotta have a way that if
this is really not working out, we can go back.
But if it is working, we need a way that we can actually land this thing as the default.
Right, right, right.
And the PEP discusses this as like,
we're going to see how it goes,
which is really interesting.
But I think it's not breaking in the sense
that you can't still run Python 3
with the thing that you've got.
You just might not be able to enable
this free threading aspect of it for some time.
Whereas from 2 to 3,
it's like you cannot run this library on 3, period.
there's no scenario which this is going to work because it needs to take into
account this and it doesn't and so it's out so I feel like there's more time and
space to evolve it and you could say well in this space you know in this data
science section of the world we use these seven libraries and we're gonna work and
make them compatible so that we can get way better performance or you know we're
to work to make sure that FastAPI and Pydantic support it really well so that we can scale our
web servers better, whatever. Yeah. No, this will be huge for web and data. I think that a lot of
people are excited for this for a really good reason. Yeah. Yeah, I totally agree. I totally
agree. Okay. So this is a big deal. It's coming in 3.13, but you've got to run Python T for now.
Yeah, it's 3.13, but it's also available in the pre-releases. The first release candidate
for 3.13 is out.
So give it a test.
If you haven't given it a test,
give it a test.
Yeah.
Very cool.
All right.
What one do we want to talk about next?
We got just a couple more minutes to cover.
We've got...
What about Python and mobile?
I think that one's...
I know there's the Black Swan talk
that Keith Russell McGee gave
and Carol Willing also sort of shouted out
like there's a couple of places
that are really, really important computationally
in the world that Python kind of isn't.
We should have it there.
And number one has got to be mobile.
Mobile and front end.
For me, mobile and front end are the two.
And like a far distant behind that is like,
could I get a single binary out of my app
that I can give to someone?
That's a different, that also is in there,
but it's not as important as,
hey, I want to build some mobile apps.
Can I use Python?
I want to learn that with an easy language.
Ask me something else.
Yeah, yeah, right.
Next question.
Yeah, so this was a,
it was almost like a big status update
on where Python is in the mobile space,
which is really exciting
because they've made a ton of progress
on getting like actual tiering of support for these platforms.
So if you don't know, Python has a like platform support tiers
where it's like tier one is like x86 Linux, right?
Like that's a, you know, 90% of PyPI downloads are that.
Like, yeah, probably want to support that one.
And then it's things like macOS, you know, x86 and ARM and all of that, right?
And then lower down, there's tier two, which is, you know, the platforms that they have people that are interested in them.
But if those people were to go away, then we wouldn't actually have a way to support them.
And tier three is like even more so.
Right.
So having tier three support for Python for both Android and iOS for 3.13, like that's super exciting.
It means that these things are getting actively tested.
There's like integration testing on real platforms and that there's people that care about it that are fixing bugs.
And this is exactly what you need to get your platform supported.
And so this is all being provided by Anaconda funding this project and Beware.
Okay.
Yeah, that's right.
They are, you know, Beware and Keith has been on this for a long time,
but Anaconda have come along and put more time and energy behind it in terms of funding.
And I think people as well, I'm not sure, but certainly in funding, that's awesome.
Yeah, so I think this was, it was both a status report and also kind of trying to figure out how these sorts of platforms can get tested more easily and like actually not having constant breaking because these platforms are so different from, you know, what almost every other core developer is using to develop Python are a lot more limited in terms of capabilities, and like lockdown in a security perspective, too.
And they have no regard for backwards compatibility.
It's so frustrating.
I have mobile apps for the Talk Python courses
that are in both iOS and Android's app stores.
And I'll get messages like,
hey, dear developer,
if we see that you're built against three-year-old APIs,
if you don't rebuild and republish your app
in the next six months, we're taking it out.
The last one I did this for was Google.
I'm like, three years, okay.
Can we, no, we can't get any better compatibility than that.
Like, I just got to keep re-uploading the same thing
even if there's no changes.
So, you know, that's just a different mentality
of like, ah, we changed all that.
We don't like that anymore.
Yeah, luckily I'm actually not sure
how affected Python in particular is by things like that.
Cause that's like utilizing APIs,
like mobile SDK APIs versus like the operating system
which yeah right like people would build apps with python and then they would be subjected to these
emails and it's not even that i was necessarily using any of those apis it's just like we see
you're compiled against the wrong version so try again you know yeah no the yeah the difficulties
that i've at least from from this talk have uh figured out is that like these platforms are just
a lot more locked down so like a lot of system calls won't be available that the test suite
like assumes are available always.
Sure.
It's almost like a circuit Python sort of deal,
but not that extreme.
Yeah.
It's like somewhere in the middle and figuring out how to all work together
happily and develop on this similar code base that has all these different
target platforms.
Yeah,
absolutely.
Absolutely.
Awesome.
Well,
I'm,
I'm really excited.
I'm all here for it.
If three years ago,
I think it was when we started working on those mobile apps,
apps. If I could have used Python in a really solid way, 100% those apps would be built in Python. But
just there's so many, so much tooling and stuff around now you got to create a signed APK before
you upload. There's a lot of stuff going on there. And so hopefully they get that that would be
a game changer. And just, you know, it's not on it wasn't here. Almost surprised me that it wasn't
here, but front-end stuff, WebAssembly, PyScripts, Pyodide, all those things I think are in that
same realm. Although they can just kind of ship stuff to the web because there's no gatekeepers,
but still. Yeah.
Was that mentioned anywhere during the summit that just didn't make a post?
No, Wasm was not, there was no topic about Wasm specifically at,
this language summit at least.
Yeah, sure. I think there was the previous year.
Previous year there was, yeah.
Should we make PDB
better? Does it matter?
Are people using PDB? What do you think?
Yeah, so this
was all about, PDB is
Python's debugger for people
that don't know. If you've never used it,
it lets you kind of like drop
into, set a breakpoint in
Python and then drop into that
exact spot with all the context and everything, which is really at a lower level. Yeah. At a
lower level than a VS Code or PyCharm. Right. Exactly. Like seeing all these like super
internals of Python, if that, if that's something that you really need. Right. Um,
and so this was a talk, that was mostly about, okay, we're, we have PDB, but now we have all of
these new models, like free threading and all of that. And also we're being a little bit
held back by backwards compatibility.
There's like a specific,
really specific point where
because of backwards compatibility reasons
and PDB is a part of the Python standard library,
it becomes difficult to break backwards compatibility
even if it would mean
you get a bunch of really good stuff out of it.
You can't always do that
because people are depending on it.
And I think that the,
yeah, the recommendation was
maybe we should develop this outside of the standard library so we can
break backwards compatibility if it's not necessary
and make it so that we can support multiple versions instead of
just having it be per version.
Yeah, that's a good idea. That's exactly what I was thinking
because there's the whole dead batteries talk, like does this still belong here?
I'm not necessarily thinking this should not be in Python,
but yeah.
something broken out maybe, but take that exact code, break it out, but, you know, enhance it
kind of independently. Yeah. And I think the concern from, from some people in the room was
that, oh, if we break this out onto PyPI, then it would potentially mean that it would not get the
same level of contribution that PDB sees because it's part of Python. Right. Sure. And I mean,
totally valid in my opinion too. Like being a part of Python is a huge like blessing of like,
yeah, this is something important, right?
But I think that there's other ways
to signal that it's something important.
Like if you look at like mypy,
mypy is underneath the Python GitHub organization.
And so maybe something like that, right?
Where it's this tool that is very actively used
by core developers for development.
And it is a little bit more official
than just some random person
putting something up on PyPI.
This is core developers supporting this.
And black is that way too, I believe, right?
It is.
So maybe it's something to signal just a little bit more of an official,
this is a core developer tool.
Here's why you should contribute to it instead of just, you know,
a random project on PyPI, which definitely wouldn't be in that case.
It would not.
It would definitely not.
All right.
How about a quick review of maybe some of the lightning talks we've got?
Any of these stand out?
you know obviously rust and python is uh seriously a one um yeah emily's talk was yeah as i say
emily's got a good one emily has a really good one because and this is like it's it's almost meta
right because lightning talks uh are not submitted ahead of time you actually have to submit them
during other people's talks um like to the list that you want to talk about this and then put
together some slides really quickly. So yeah, these talks are pretty impressive in that way,
having mere minutes. But the Emily's talk was about, it was kind of like wrapping up a theme
that was being heard multiple times over the course of the language summit. But obviously,
this is a problem outside of the language summit too, which is that when someone goes to make a
prototype for a pep, they are given, at least today, not a whole lot of support for doing that
prototype because it's basically like, oh, we think that this should be developed outside of
the standard library initially, right? Like that's a really common determination that the steering
council comes to. And so being able to have kind of like a standardized way that people do a pep
prototype outside of the standard library. So things like creating a repo and like having all
of this existing infrastructure set up and maybe even hosting it under the Python GitHub organization
to give it some like air of officiality of like, yeah, this is something like really big is
happening here. It's not just like someone in a corner writing something, right? Like giving some
more grandiosity to, to the work that's being done and not just kind of saying, oh, go away.
Like that is an intention, right?
But that's kind of how it can land sometimes.
Right.
And maybe setting up people for success, at least this is what we're going to expect from you.
If you go through this process, then you've got, you're further down the pipeline of
having that conversation for a pep.
Yeah, definitely.
And like, if you're wanting to write something that is for Python, you know, you probably don't
necessarily care about like setting up these exact workflows for publishing to PyPI. Like that's just
a whole bunch of things that are in your way to actually being successful. So having that all be
figured out already ahead of time for you makes things a lot easier for you. So, yeah.
Yep. Yep. Let's, let's finish out with Yuri Silvanov's presentation, efficient data sharing
between sub interpreters and it's interesting because we talked about free threaded python but
the year before the big news was sub interpreters and Eric snow's work and those are not directly
competing type of things but in a sense they're kind of competing
yeah they're definitely competing for being like the model of how to do efficient you know
parallelism in python yeah how do we isolate the stuff so that we can avoid the guilt we take it
out and add different algorithms or do we just make copies of the interpreter and run them in
isolation but then you have this data sharing issue i can't just share a pointer easily right
so what's this about yeah so yuri uh basically came with and this was also a if you want the
extended version yuri also gave like an actual pycon talk about this library that he's developed
called MemHive. What's it called? MemHive.
Like M-E-M-H-I-V-E. All right. Awesome. And just for everyone listening, just this week,
last week, recently, all the videos of all the talks are now available on YouTube.
So it's been a while coming, but you can go watch it now. Exactly. So go watch them all.
If you missed out on that talk, go watch them. But yeah, so this library in particular is,
It's basically a way using immutable data structures.
There's this immutable data structure called an H-A-M-T.
I actually don't know what it's short for, but it's a hash array map tree.
There we go.
It was in the, I wrote it down.
And it's essentially like a way to have this tree that can be passed around and shared
without worrying what the other processes,
sub-interpreters are, they're not processes,
the other sub-interpreters are doing to this data structure.
So it enables a more efficient and safe way of sharing data
that's kind of like in a tree structure.
And I think the demo that he ended up giving
was about a dictionary-like data structure
where you have a million keys
and a bunch of sub-interpreter workers working on that data.
And they're able to, because it is using this immutable data structure, the modifications and changes are all safe, but it's also like super scalable and performant.
Yeah.
The thing about parallelism and multithreading is if it's immutable, you can have many things that you want reading from the same memory.
It's only when they start writing does it matter.
So.
Exactly.
And yeah, this has a way, a mechanism to capture the writes in a way that is safe so that the
current one can see what has been written and then the other ones aren't affected because
their copy is not changed.
Okay.
That sounds very interesting.
We talked about the coming compatibility matrix of free threaded Python.
This won't have that issue, right?
This operates in the every version of Python.
Yeah.
So I would assume that this sort of module would be able to say,
like, I am ready for a gill-free world.
So that's like the mechanism that I believe CPython has adopted
for saying that your C module is ready for not having a GIL.
You actually have to opt into it,
and then that module will be allowed to run in FreeThreadedPython.
Yeah.
And something I recently learned is there's separate wheeled builds
for FreeThreadedPython as well.
Yeah.
So that's interesting.
Yeah, it's its own, I don't know exactly the phrase for it,
but yeah, its own wheel tag.
Platform target or whatever.
Platform, yeah.
Yeah, like free-threaded gets appended to macOS ARM64 or whatever.
Exactly.
Yeah, awesome.
All right, Seth, this has been great.
How about some parting thoughts?
Let's close this out with just takeaways from the whole experience.
Yeah, I mean, the Language Summit,
It is lovely.
One of the things that's most important to me
is this whole aspect of storytelling.
And so that's why I felt really, really happy
that I was invited along
to be able to tell these stories to all of you.
And I think that having all of these different narratives
all in one place of all of these huge themes
about what Python is going through all at once, right?
Like it's really incredible
how many different things are happening
in Python all at once.
And like sometimes when you're focusing
just one or just two, you don't have this huge context of, wow, Python is changing in at least
20 different ways all at once. And we're somehow doing really, really well, I would say. I have no
doubt about any of these huge changes that Python is going through to take it in the wrong direction.
I'm feeling hopeful and excited about all of them. So it's an exciting time.
Yeah, I am as well. And it is really tricky to get a holistic picture of the progress.
because there's a lot of different groups doing different things
and there's no one person's or one company's job
to get somebody to come and tell that story.
So, yeah, thanks for giving us the insight here.
It's been awesome.
Thanks for being on the show, and I'm sure we'll have you back soon.
Yeah, sounds good. Thanks for having me.
See you.
Bye.